---
title: How to effectively work from home
date: 2020-08-28
description:
  My 4 step guide for surviving the working or studying from home routine. A
  routine that I follow to keep my life organized and get things done
imagePath: /images/work-from-home-abstract.webp
tags: Productivity, WFH, Guide
---

Working from home wasn’t something I was familiar with until eight months ago
when I started working as a full-time developer from the comfort of my room. The
first couple of months were challenging but soon enough I was able to develop a
solid system for effective work from home, with the word effective I mean
getting enough things done to feel better about yourself and impress others.
Now, I feel that I can share it, and I hope that this would work for you or at
least inspire you to develop your own system. **Who is this article for?** this
article is for people who either work or study from home and are looking for
ways to improve this process.

As **Stephen R. Covey** writer of the book 7 Habits Of Highly Effective People
once said

> “The key is in not spending time, but in investing it.”

my goal with this blog post is to help you use the most out of your time to
finish your work and have time to do other things that you like doing in life. I
am going to talk about 4 steps that I go through almost every day, so without
furthermore talking let’s get right into it:

### 1. Set your tasks and goals for the day

It’s so important to know what work are you going to do in a day, it helps to
clarify how can you spend your time, and personally, it excites me to know which
tasks or challenges I am going to work on the next day. So how can we set these
tasks? usually, I would have a couple of tasks to finish in a day so what I do
is I divide my tasks into smaller pieces or to-do items and I add them to my
to-do list, my favorite to-do app is **Microsoft To-Do**. Breaking tasks into
smaller pieces helps me know the steps I will go through to finish each task.

### 2. Build a well-structured work schedule

Following the previous step after knowing the tasks and the steps to finish
those tasks, now, it's time to priorities the to-do list items and specify a
time block for each. _Time Blocking_ is a technique to divide your day into time
blocks where each **block** is dedicated to accomplishing a specific task. For
example, from 9 to 10 — I will be preparing for our team’s morning meeting,
then, from 10 to 11 — I will be having that meeting, and so on. I use **Google
Calendar** for this, putting items from the to-do list into the calendar helps
me get them done. **Amy Landino** a YouTuber and a best-selling author calls
this _Calendar Blocking_ and she made more than one video about it, I recommend
you [watch](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y-aFEA0MCQ4) this one.

### 3. Take regular breaks

Sometimes while working or studying, we feel that we just can’t think anymore
which is probably because of too much information coming to our brain all at
once, that’s when we should take a break. Taking frequent breaks helps us stay
productive, retain focus, and stay creative. One more thing that these breaks
help me with is avoiding any back or neck pain because I won’t be setting on my
chair for a long time. So, how do we take regular breaks? An app I use for that
is called **PomoDone** which applies a famous technique called the _Pomodoro
Technique_ which is basically, using a timer to break down work or study time
into intervals. You can also use those breaks to check your notifications, email
inbox, or reply to someone’s message but the key point here is to be careful not
to get dragged into a long break because that will make it harder for you to get
back to what you were doing.

### 4. Take notes and track your progress

When I have a big task that takes more than a day, I usually document it, I
write down the process I went through to get it done. As a developer, there are
so many things I would learn in a week so having these notes is very helpful
when I want to teach someone about something I had learned or if I want to do
the same thing again. A nice tool I use for this is **Notion** it can be used
for many things and that’s one of the things I use it for, I would have a
template for the tasks or the technologies that I’m learning and each task or
technology has a page where I keep all of my notes.

Now! if you have used the tools I am using or even better ones, you will be able
to create weekly reports on the amount of progress you’ve made, how much each
task took from your time, how much you’ve learned, etc. Looking back at what
things you have achieved by the end of every week is going to contribute so much
to your productivity and your overall happiness.

Building routines or habits isn’t easy I still face difficulties sticking to my
routine every once in a while because sometimes life just gets in the way but
that doesn’t mean we shouldn’t try, we should try and we should also be patient
because it will take time. I’d like to refer you to an amazing book called
**Atomic Habits** by James Clear if you are someone who is struggling to build
habits or break bad ones this book will help you, if you don’t like reading that
much you can listen to it on Audible. In the end, I hope you’ve enjoyed this
blog post, and if you did, share it with someone who might find it helpful.
